# 5 Induction and Recursion

Proofs using mathematical induction have two parts. First, they show that the statement holds for the positive integer 1. Second, they show that if the statement holds for a positive integer then it must also hold for the next larger integer. Mathematical induction is based on the rule of inference that tells us that if P(1) and ∀k(P(k) → P(k + 1)) are true for the domain of positive integers,then ∀nP(n) is true. Mathematical induction can be used to prove a tremendous variety of results. Understanding how to read and construct proofs by mathematical induction is a key goal of learning discrete mathematics.

In Chapter 2 we explicitly defined sets and functions. That is, we described sets by listing their elements or by giving some property that characterizes these elements. We gave formulae for the values of functions. There is another important way to define such objects, based on mathematical induction. To define functions, some initial terms are specified, and a rule is given for finding subsequent values from values already known. (We briefly touched on this sort of definition in Chapter 2 when we showed how sequences can be defined using recurrence relations.)Sets can be defined by listing some of the i r elements and giving rules for constructing elements from those already known to be in the set. Such definitions,called recursive definitions, are used throughout discrete mathematics and computer science. Once we have defined a set
recursively, we can use a proof method called structural induction to prove results about this set.